Now with all of the theory out of the way, let's build our first simple rest API and for that, I'm in
a brand new folder,
I only did one thing in there, I ran npm init and confirmed all the default settings,
since I'm using version control I also added a gitignore file so that I can ignore an upcoming node module's
folder and that is it.
Now to build a rest
API, how do we start?
Well as I mentioned, all the things you learned are still important.
We build a node express server just as we did before
and also by the way, of course you don't need to use express, you could build just a node server API but
you have to do a lot of request parsing and so on on your own as you learned it before in this course and
you can use other frameworks too. There even are specialized rest API frameworks
but we will use express which is a great all-rounder and therefore I will install as a production dependency
with --save express, we need expressjs to build an API conveniently.
So this is the first dependency we'll install into this brand new project here.
Now with that installed, I'll also install another package and that will be a development dependency with
--save dev
nodemon because I still don't want to restart my server manually after every change,
so let's quickly install that package now.
With nodemon installed, let's go to the package.json file,
let's add a start script in the scripts section and let's execute nodemon app.js here to start
app.js with nodemon. App.js does not exist yet
so let's add it and in there we'll set up our nodejs
server.
So what do we do in here?
Well first of all, I will import express by requiring express like this,
then I want to create my express app by executing express as a function and these are of course the
exact same steps we executed before in this course
and last but not least, we can listen to incoming requests,
let's say on port 8080 this time, not
3000, I'll
need to add later for something else,
let's use 8080 for now.
This is a very simple server that we could now start and that will not do anything of course,
it has no routes to find but this is our simplest possible node express server.
Now to add some routes and to do something with them, I will also install the body parser as a production
dependency with --save so that I can parse
well incoming request bodies
and now let's start adding some routes. We could add them in here with app use to handle any method
or app get, app post, app put and so on to handle specific http methods for specific paths
but I will use the express router again and I will also create a new routes folder which you wouldn't
have to do but this structure still make sense, separating routes and controllers,
you just won't have views anymore,
the views folder will not be recreated because we'll not render any views anymore,
we'll just exchange data.
So in the routes folder here,
let's say we're building a simple block or a simple messaging social network block like application
and we have some feed routes,
so like the news feed or something like that where we simply are able to create new messages, show existing
messages and so on.
So I'll create a feed.js file in the routes folder and in there, we set up our express router by again
importing express into this file too because we need something from that package in that file and then
I create the router by calling express router as a function and I will export the router at the bottom.
In-between we can now define some routes and I want to start very simple with a get route
to let's say posts where I serve my posts later on,
not right now but later on.
So here I have my posts and of course I now need my logic that should execute when a request reaches this.
Therefore I'll create a new folder, controllers and in there I'll add my feed.js file as well,
so feed.js in controllers now. In there
let me export a new function, get posts which of course and that also does not change gets a request,
the response object and the next function it could call to let the next middleware take over and in there,
I want to send a response and this will be the first part that gets interesting.
Before we write that code, in my routes feed.js file, I will import my feed controller by requiring
it from the controllers folder and there from the feed file
and I will assign my feed controller get posts function here as the function that should be executed
for this route.
Now to be able to reach that route, we need to register the route in app.js which is our starting file.
So in there, I will import my feed routes by requiring them from routes feed like this and then all we
have to do here is we have to use these routes, used to forward any http method, we'll filter them out in
the routes file then like with this get function here.
So we forward any incoming request to feed route let's say or let's say we only forward requests that start
with /feed, again
this is logic you already learned about.
So now any incoming request that starts with /feed will make it into feed routes,
so into this file and there we handle one request right now,
/posts.
So in total, /feed/posts would be handled right now
as long as it is a get request,
this kind of request would get handled by this controller.
And now let's talk about the response and how we could send a request to that route.